Monolithic architecture: The application is built as a single deployable unit, where different functionalities such as authentication, orders, payments, etc. are part of the same application/service.

Microservices architecture: The application is divided into multiple independently deployable services, where each service owns a specific business capability, such as auth service, order service, payment service, etc.

// --------Project Ecommerce --------
•  HTTP → Business operations (Product, Auth, Payment, Checkout) 
•  RabbitMQ → Asynchronous notifications (cart.updated, order.created, payment.completed) 
•  Socket.IO → Real-time UI updates 
•  Gateway → Acts as the bridge between RabbitMQ and Socket.IO.

Q1. Why doesn't Cart Service directly use Socket.IO?

"The Cart Service is responsible only for cart business logic. It shouldn't know which frontend clients are connected or manage WebSocket connections. The Gateway already acts as the single entry point for the application, so it is the appropriate place to maintain Socket.IO connections. The Cart Service simply publishes a cart.updated event, and the Gateway consumes it and notifies connected clients."

Cart Service -> RabbitMQ -> Gateway -> Socket.IO -> Frontend
      
Q2. RabbitMQ is down. User clicks Add to Cart.

The event is not published.

What happens?
✅ Cart is saved.
❌ Real-time UI update doesn't happen.
✅ If the user refreshes the page, the cart is loaded correctly from MongoDB.

"RabbitMQ is only used for asynchronous notifications in my project. The cart operation itself is completed before the event is published. If RabbitMQ is unavailable, the cart is still stored successfully in MongoDB, but the real-time Socket.IO notification won't be delivered."

Q3. Why does Cart Service call Product Service?
Because Cart Service needs to verify:

Product exists.
Product is active.
Price is correct (depending on implementation).

Q4. Product Service is down.

Cart Service cannot validate the product.

Should it save the cart?
No, Return:503 Service Unavailable

Q5. Why does Gateway verify JWT?
"The API Gateway centralizes authentication. It verifies the JWT once, extracts the user identity, and forwards the customer context to downstream services. This avoids duplicating JWT verification logic across every microservice."

Q6. Why RabbitMQ? Why not HTTP?
http will creates tight coupling.
"RabbitMQ decouples the producer from the consumer. The Cart Service publishes an event without knowing which services will consume it. This makes the architecture more extensible."

Q7. Why are these events?
"Something already happened."
cart.updated
order.created
payment.completed

Q8. Why Fanout Exchange?
fanout exchange because the same event can be useful to multiple consumers.

Today: Gateway
Tomorrow: Analytics,Inventory,Email

Fanout broadcasts the event to all bound queues.

Q9. Tell me in one sentence why RabbitMQ exists in your project.?

"RabbitMQ is used only for asynchronous event notifications. After a business operation successfully completes, the service publishes an event so interested consumers, such as the Gateway for real-time Socket.IO updates or future analytics and notification services, can react without tightly coupling the services."

Q.10 How did you integrate Razorpay/payment service?

"The Payment Service creates a Razorpay order, the frontend opens Razorpay Checkout, and after payment Razorpay returns the payment ID, order ID, and signature. The frontend sends those values to my backend, where the Payment Service independently generates the expected HMAC-SHA256 signature using the Razorpay secret and compares it with the received signature. Only after successful verification do I create the final ecommerce order."

Verification :
"I generate the expected signature according to Razorpay's documented HMAC-SHA256 verification algorithm, using the Razorpay secret_key and the order ID and payment ID. I then compare that generated signature with the signature returned by Razorpay through the frontend. If they match, the payment response has been authenticated; if they don't, I reject it."

How do you know your generated signature is correct?
"I follow Razorpay's defined HMAC-SHA256 algorithm using the order ID, payment ID, and server-side secret. Razorpay generated the original signature using the same verification scheme, so matching signatures authenticate the response."

For a production system, I would add Razorpay webhooks as an additional server-to-server mechanism so that payment state can still be reconciled if the browser disconnects."

Q. The payment request is slow, and the user retries from another tab. How do you prevent double charging?"
Ans ✅ : "I would use an idempotency key for the payment operation so retries of the same payment request don't create another charge. Additionally, I'd enforce a business-level constraint that an order can have only one successful payment, using a transactional state transition. If the first payment is still processing, the second request returns the existing payment status rather than initiating another charge."

Q : diff in Kafka and RabbitMQ 
"RabbitMQ is primarily a message broker designed around queues and reliable message delivery, making it a good fit for background jobs and service-to-service tasks. Kafka is a distributed event-streaming platform where events are persisted and consumers track their own offsets, making it particularly useful for high-throughput event streams, multiple independent consumers, and replaying historical events."

RabbitMQ flow :

Producer → Exchange → Routing Key → Queue → Consumer → ACK/NACK → DLQ → Prefetch

Q: how will you scale RabbitMQ
To scale RabbitMQ, I would think about both the consumers and the RabbitMQ cluster itself.

1. Scale consumers first
If messages are accumulating:

RabbitMQ -> Queue: 100,000 messages, Add more consumer instances:
             Queue
          ↙    ↓    ↘
     Consumer  Consumer  Consumer
        1         2         3

RabbitMQ distributes messages among consumers.

ii. Tune consumers with prefetch : Use prefetch to control how many unacknowledged messages a consumer can hold.

"I'd use RabbitMQ's prefetch setting. If I set prefetch(1), RabbitMQ sends only one unacknowledged message to a consumer at a time. Once the consumer processes the message and sends an ACK, RabbitMQ sends the next message."

One small distinction: prefetch doesn't mean the queue itself is blocked. Other consumers can continue receiving messages. It limits delivery to that particular consumer.

2. Use multiple queues when needed : If one queue becomes a bottleneck, you can partition the workload across multiple queues.
                 Exchange
              ↙     ↓      ↘
          Queue 1  Queue 2  Queue 3
             ↓       ↓        ↓
        Consumers Consumers Consumers

The routing strategy depends on your use case.

3. Scale RabbitMQ itself with a cluster : Instead of running one RabbitMQ server, run multiple RabbitMQ nodes

RabbitMQ
   ↓
Single point of failure ❌

run multiple RabbitMQ nodes:

RabbitMQ Node 1
RabbitMQ Node 2
RabbitMQ Node 3

This provides high availability and allows RabbitMQ infrastructure to handle more workload.

4. Use appropriate queue replication

For important queues, RabbitMQ supports replicated queue designs such as quorum queues.

This protects against losing messages when a RabbitMQ node fails.

There is a trade-off:

More replication → better durability/availability → more storage and network overhead.

Q : how will you make sure each consumer or queue will process a task once
RabbitMQ can provide at-least-once delivery, but it does not guarantee that your business task executes exactly once. ACK alone doesn't guarantee exactly-once processing.

"RabbitMQ provides at-least-once delivery rather than true exactly-once processing. A message is normally delivered to one consumer and acknowledged after successful processing. However, if the consumer crashes before the ACK, RabbitMQ can redeliver the message. Therefore, for business-critical operations, I'd make the consumer idempotent using a unique task or event ID and a database unique constraint or equivalent atomic operation. That way, even if the same message is delivered twice, the business operation happens only once."

Queue distribution → Who gets the message?

ACK → Did the consumer successfully process it?

Idempotency → What happens if the same message is delivered again?

Q: How would you implement refresh-token reuse detection?

"I'd maintain refresh-token sessions server-side. Each refresh token belongs to a token family, and I'd store a hash of the token along with its family ID, user ID, expiry and revocation status. On every refresh, I'd invalidate the current token and issue a new one. If a previously revoked token is presented again, I'd treat it as possible token theft and revoke the entire token family."

Q: How will you prevent pagination tracks if new entry got created?
I'd use a deterministic sort such as (createdAt, id).
"With cursor pagination, I don't track a row number. I track the values of a stable, deterministic sort key. For example, I can use (createdAt, id) as the cursor. New records inserted before my current position won't affect the next page because the query asks for records after the cursor. If the user changes the sort order, the existing cursor is no longer valid, so I reset the cursor and start a new pagination sequence."

Ques: Suppose S3 has 1 million records, and your backend has already inserted 100,000 into MySQL/MongoDB.
 (large data import + resumability + idempotency problem)
 idempotent insert or upsert + checkpoint
"I would process the S3 data in batches rather than loading all 1 million records at once. I'd create an import job and persist its progress after each successfully processed batch. If the process or network fails after 100,000 records, I can resume from the saved checkpoint. However, the checkpoint alone isn't sufficient because the process could crash after inserting a batch but before saving the checkpoint. So I'd also give every source record a unique ID and enforce a unique constraint in the target database, using an idempotent insert or upsert. This way, even if a batch is retried, records that were already inserted won't be duplicated."

Ques: One of your microservice is slow how will you acknowledge the bottleneck and fix for that
"First, I would check the monitoring and logs to see the API latency and identify where the request is spending its time. I'd check the database, Redis, downstream services and external APIs. Once I find the slow component, I'd fix that specific bottleneck—for example, optimize a slow DB query or add an index if the database is the issue. If the service is overloaded because of high traffic, then I'd scale it horizontally. After the fix, I'd verify the latency and error rate again."

Ques : Payment full flow ?
Ans ✅: 
"When the user clicks Pay, the backend first creates an order (order table) with PENDING_PAYMENT status and creates a payment record (in payment table) with PENDING status along with an idempotency key. The client then opens the ICICI checkout and the user completes the payment.

Once the client sends the payment response back, my backend first verifies the payment signature using the provider's secret key. If the signature is valid, I start a database transaction.

Inside the transaction, I use a conditional atomic update to change the payment from PENDING to SUCCESS. This prevents the same payment confirmation from being processed twice. Then I update the order to PAID, atomically decrement the inventory only if stock is available, and create a successful transaction record.

Since these operations are inside an ACID transaction, if all operations succeed, I commit. If any operation fails, I roll everything back.

So the atomic updates handle individual concurrent or duplicate operations, while the ACID transaction ensures consistency across the multiple database changes.

If the payment confirmation is delayed or a webhook is missed, I keep the payment in PENDING and use reconciliation with the payment provider to determine the final status later."

Ques : how will you prevent duplicate payment or network failure issues ?
Ans ✅:"For duplicate payments, I'd use an idempotency key for each payment attempt and enforce uniqueness on the server side. I'd also pass the idempotency key to the payment provider if they support it.

For network failures, I wouldn't immediately mark the payment as failed because the request may have reached the provider and the payment may have succeeded even though I didn't receive the response. I'd query the provider using the payment reference and also handle provider webhooks or reconciliation to determine the final state.

A webhook is push. The provider calls your server to tell you the payment result. Reconciliation is pull. Your server asks the provider for the transaction status if the webhook doesn't arrive. In interviews, just say webhook is preferred, reconciliation is fallback.
Wait for a webhook for a short window, like up to2 minutes. If it doesn't arrive, enqueue a reconciliation job with backoff. That prevents hammering the provider. Now, suppose the webhook and the reconciliation job hit at the same time. How do you prevent double updates or duplicate notifications (idempotency)?

Additionally, I can use a distributed lock or an atomic database state transition to prevent concurrent payment attempts for the same order, but those are secondary protections rather than replacements for idempotency."


"findOneAndUpdate() itself is an atomic operation, not a locking strategy. When I use a conditional update such as stock: {$gt: 0}, it behaves like an optimistic concurrency-control pattern because I don't acquire a lock; I rely on the database to atomically verify the condition and update the document."

"Optimistic locking assumes conflicts are relatively rare. We don't lock the record while reading; instead, we attach a version and verify that the version hasn't changed when we update. If it changed, we reject or retry the operation."

Pessimistic approach means: "Before modifying the data, acquire a lock so nobody else can modify it."


User clicks Pay twice
        ↓
Idempotency key       → prevent duplicate payment
        +
Distributed lock      → prevent concurrent processing : 
("A distributed lock can additionally prevent concurrent payment attempts for the same order, but I wouldn't rely on it as the sole protection.")
        +
DB state transition   → protect payment state
        +
Provider webhook/
reconciliation        → determine actual payment result

UPDATE payments
SET status = 'PROCESSING'
WHERE payment_id = ?
AND status = 'PENDING';  

// If another request tries the same operation, it won't be able to transition the same payment from PENDING again.
PENDING → PROCESSING → SUCCESS

Ques : Suppose your product service caches product details in Redis. Seller updates the price from 1000 rupees to 900, but some users still see 1000 for a few minutes. Why did that happen? How would you debug it? How would you fix it? And what caching strategy would you choose?

Ans ✅: DB updated, but Redis still had old stale value." Debug by comparing DB vs. Redis, check TTL and invalidation path. Fix with cache aside. On update, delete or refresh key. TTL is a fallback, not the primary fix.

so in a cache-aside pattern, the database is the source of truth. So the usual idea for updates is write to the DB first. Then either delete the corresponding cache key or update it. Most teams just delete after a successful DB write. Then on the next read, if the key is missing, you fetch from DB and repopulate Redis. So TTL is just a safety net, not the main mechanism.

Ques :You delete the cache key, ten thousand users request that product at once. How do you prevent a stampede on your DB?
Ans ✅: that's called a cache stampede. The most common fix is a distributed lock. Only the first request grabs the lock, rebuilds the cache, and everyone else briefly waits or retries Redis. Other patterns also help. Stale-while-revalidate, serve slightly stale data while a background job refreshes, cache warming for hot keys, and randomized TTLs to avoid mass expiry. If asked in an interview, say "I'd use a Redis lock so only one request rebuilds the cache, others back off and retry, and that's exactly what most teams do in production.

Ques : Suppose RabbitMQ is down for fifteen minutes, but orders are still being created. What would you do so that no payment request gets lost?
Ans ✅: Outbox Pattern. So instead of "create order then publish to RabbitMQ", you write both the order and an outbox event in the same DB transaction. Then a separate background publisher reads from the outbox and publishes to RabbitMQ with retries. So if RabbitMQ is down, the event just sits in your DB and will be published later.

Ques : Now the next tricky part. What if that publisher crashes after sending to RabbitMQ but before marking the outbox row as sent? How do you avoid double-processing the payment?
Ans ✅: Make the consumer idempotent. Same payment ID processed only once.

Ques : Suppose your payment service processes successfully, but the acknowledgment back to RabbitMQ never happens. So the message gets redelivered. Walk me through how your system behaves end-to-end.
Ans ✅: This is another classic at-least-once delivery case, and it goes like this. The payment service processes the message, updates the payment row from pending to success in an atomic conditional update, and commits. But the ack never reaches RabbitMQ. So RabbitMQ redelivers. On redelivery, the consumer checks the payment status, sees it's already success, and skips the business logic, then just acks. Net effect... one payment, one state transition, no duplicate emails, and you still ack the duplicate.

-------------------------------------------------------------------- DocMind AI ------------------------------------------:
See the flow diagram

follow ups :
Ques1 : What will -what will happen if you are storing whole PDF as a page instead of chunk ?
Ans ✅: "I wouldn't store the whole PDF as a single embedding because it will blur the meaning and hurt retrieval accuracy, plus you might hit model token limits."
Then explain the tradeoff. "Instead, I chunk the document into semantically meaningful pieces with a bit of overlap. That gives me much better retrieval relevance and reduces token bloat." 
Q : "Why not one sentence per chunk?" 
"Too small loses context. Too large loses precision. So we balance size and overlap and measure retrieval quality."

Ques2 : why did you choose a vector database like ChromaDB or Pinecone instead of just storing chunks in MongoDB and doing text search?
Ans ✅:It's because you need semantic similarity search. Embeddings capture meaning and vector DBs index for that.
 Keyword search in Mongo can miss meaning. So if your PDF says Node.js is an asynchronous runtime and the user asks how does Node handle concurrent requests, keywords might miss. 

QUES3 : Imagine you now have one million PDFs and thousands of concurrent users. Search latency is climbing and embeddings are a bottleneck. how you'd scale the ingestion and retrieval paths.
Ans ✅: 
Ingestion: Upload PDFs to S3, publish document IDs to RabbitMQ, and horizontally scale workers. For large PDFs, split processing into chunk-level jobs and use retries/idempotency.
Embeddings: Batch embedding requests and process them asynchronously; increase worker concurrency while respecting the embedding API rate limits.
Retrieval: Horizontally scale the vector database, add proper vector indexes, and partition/filter by document or tenant where possible.
Caching: Use Redis for frequently repeated queries/results.
Monitoring: Track queue depth, embedding latency, retrieval latency, error/retry rates, and DLQ size.

QUES4: what if one PDF is 5 gigabytes and another is two pages? How do you keep big jobs from blocking the line?
“I’d prevent large PDFs from blocking small jobs by separating workloads.

For example, I’d have small and large PDF queues. Small PDFs go to dedicated workers for low latency, while large PDFs go to separate workers. For a 5 GB PDF, I’d also process it in chunks or smaller jobs rather than treating the entire PDF as one task.

QUES5: How can you give more precise answer from rag
Chunk overlap, hybrid search (mixes keyword and vector),
adjusting top k (how many junks we will pull), Metadata filtering (narrows search space and looks inside specific document which we are fetching)

-------------------------------------OAuth (Google)--------------------------
1.When the user clicks 'Continue with Google', the frontend redirects them to Google's OAuth server.
2.After the user logs in and grants permission, Google redirects back to our backend with an authorization code. 
3.The backend exchanges this authorization code for an access token, 
then uses the access token to fetch the user's profile information like name and email from Google's UserInfo API (Google validates the token and returns the user's profile information).

4.If the user doesn't exist, we create a new account. 
5.Finally, our backend generates its own JWT and sends it to the frontend. From that point onward, the frontend authenticates with our backend using the JWT rather than Google's access token

Google redirects to your callback route: GET /auth/google/callback?code=abc123  --auth code

app.get("/auth/google/callback", async (req, res) => {
    const code = req.query.code;

    // Exchange the code for an access token
});

3rd point how it works behind the schenes

API Call 1: Get Access Token with help of authorization code

Your backend sends:
POST https://oauth2.googleapis.com/token

Google returns:
{
  "access_token": "ya29.a0Af...",
  "expires_in": 3600,
  "token_type": "Bearer"
}

API Call 2: Get User Profile

Now your backend uses that access token.
GET https://www.googleapis.com/oauth2/v2/userinfo
Authorization: Bearer ya29.a0Af...

Now Google returns:
{
  "id": "123456789",
  "email": "vikas@gmail.com",
  "verified_email": true,
  "name": "Vikas Verma",
  "picture": "https://...."
}

--------------------Docker--------------------
1. What is Docker?

Docker is a containerization platform that packages an application along with its dependencies, libraries, and runtime into a lightweight container, ensuring consistent execution across different environments.

2. What is a Container?

A container is a running instance of a Docker image. 
docker image -> docker run -> Container

3. What is a Docker Image?

A Docker image is a read-only blueprint containing the application code, dependencies, libraries, and runtime required to create containers.
Class- Object || Image-Conatiner

4. Difference between Image and Container
Blueprint, running Application

5. Containerization & volumes
"Containerization packages an application and its dependencies into an isolated container. 
 Docker volumes provide persistent storage outside the container's lifecycle, so data isn't lost when the container is recreated or removed."

5. Why Docker?

"It eliminates the 'works on my machine' problem by packaging the application and its dependencies into a portable container."

6. Commands
Build image : docker build -t ecommerce .
Delete image : docker rmi imageId
Run container : docker run -p 5000:5000 ecommerce (Host 3000 → Container 3000)
Stop container : docker stop containerID

List containers : docker ps
List images : docker images

7. Explain your Dockerfile  (.dockerignore used to ignore node_modules or .env., .git)
Dockerfile -> "What is my application and how do I build it?"

Docker Compose -> "What services does my application need and how do they run together?"

Dockerfile = How to build/run one application


FROM node:20                         // base Image

WORKDIR /app                         // sets current working directory

COPY package*.json .                 // copies files

RUN npm install                      // executes while building image i.e RUN npm install	

COPY . .                             // . source on your computer, . destination inside image

EXPOSE 5000

CMD ["npm","start"]                  // Executed when container starts.

8. Dockekr-compose.yml

Docker Compose = How to run multiple containers together

Suppose your application has: Node.js API, MongoDB, Redis, RabbitMQ
You could manually run:
docker run ...
docker run ...
docker run ...
docker run ... (That's annoying.)

Instead, docker-compose.yml describes all of them. and Docker Compose starts all the services.
docker compose up


Dockekr-compose.yml

name: e-commerce (optional)

services:

  service-name:
    image: image-name
    container_name: container-name
    build: .
    ports:
      - "3000:3000"
    environment:
      - MONGODB_URI=mongodb://mongodb:27017/ecommerce
    depends_on:
      - mongodb

  api:
    build: .
    ports:
      - "5000:5000"

  mongodb:
    image: mongo

  redis:
    image: redis

  rabbitmq:
    image: rabbitmq:3-management

//-------------- CICD Using GitHub actions ------------
explain flow :
"Our code is hosted on GitHub. Whenever code is pushed to the main branch, GitHub Actions runs the CI pipeline by installing dependencies, running tests, and validating the build. If everything succeeds, it deploys the application to our server automatically. For deployments to an EC2 instance, GitHub Actions connects securely over SSH and restarts the application."

"SSH (Secure Shell) is a secure protocol used to remotely connect to a server and execute commands. In CI/CD pipelines, GitHub Actions often uses SSH to connect to an EC2 instance and automate deployment tasks such as pulling the latest code, restarting services, or updating Docker containers."

Creating a CICD flow using GitHub actions :
- On project, on root dir create 
  - .GitHub (folder)
       workflows (folder)
        -deploy.yaml (this will we treated as action, we can give any name to this)


Developer
    │
git push
    │
    ▼
GitHub
    │
    ▼
GitHub Actions
    │
    ├── Install dependencies
    ├── Run tests
    ├── Build application
    ├── Build Docker image (optional)
    └── SSH into EC2
            │
            ▼
git pull / docker compose pull
docker compose up -d
            │
            ▼
Application updated


Where does the SSH key come from?
"When creating an EC2 instance, AWS lets us create or select a key pair. AWS stores the public key on the EC2 instance and downloads the private key (.pem) to our local machine. To allow GitHub Actions to connect securely, we store the private key as a GitHub Secret. During the workflow, the SSH action uses that private key to authenticate with the EC2 server."

"uses references a reusable GitHub Action. An Action is a packaged piece of automation that someone has already implemented. For example, actions/checkout checks out the repository, actions/setup-node installs Node.js, and appleboy/ssh-action establishes an SSH connection to a remote server so I can execute deployment commands."

deploy.yaml file in root project :

name: Deploy code on EC2
on:                  // run this action on, push, when someone push on this branch
  push:
    branches: [main]

jobs:            // we are telling we have some jobs like deploy
  deploy:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest    // this GitHub action is runs on service ubuntu, specifying where git action runs
    steps:
      - Checkout code
      - Install Node
      - npm install
      - npm test
      - SSH into EC2
      - docker compose up -d

example from project :


name: Deploy code on EC2
on:                
  push:
    branches: [main]

jobs:          
  deploy:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest  
    steps:
      - name: Checkout code
        uses: actions/checkout@v4       // predefine action from git action team
      
      - name: SSH into EC2
        uses: appleboy/ssh-action@v1   // predefine action from git action team
        with:
          host: ${{ secrets.EC2_HOST }} // this is ip address of EC2 app, and stored in github actions
          username: ubuntu or ec2-user 
          key: ${{ secrets.EC2_SSH_KEY }} // we will get this key from EC2
          
          
          script: |
                cd /home/ubuntu/ecommerce-microservices (this path we will get if we do deployment on aws, ubuntu
                git pull
                docker compose up -d --build


Can we use CI/CD with serverless applications?
"Yes. CI/CD works with both traditional and serverless applications. The CI part—building and testing the code—is similar. The CD part differs. For a traditional application, the pipeline might SSH into an EC2 instance to deploy. For a serverless application, the pipeline deploys directly to services like AWS Lambda using AWS APIs or deployment tools, so SSH isn't needed."

--------------------AWS---------------------
EC2

Q1. What is EC2? How would you deploy a Node.js application on EC2?

Answer:
EC2 is a virtual server provided by AWS. I can launch an EC2 instance, connect to it using SSH, install Node.js and required dependencies, clone my application, configure environment variables, and run the application using something like PM2. I would also configure the required security-group ports.

Q2. What is a Security Group in EC2?

Answer:
A Security Group acts like a firewall for an EC2 instance. It controls which inbound and outbound traffic is allowed. For example, I can allow SSH on port 22 and HTTP/HTTPS traffic on ports 80/443.

S3

Q3. Why would you use S3 in a MERN application?

Answer:
I would use S3 to store files such as images, videos, PDFs, and user uploads instead of storing them on the EC2 server. S3 is designed for object storage and is more suitable for storing large files.

Q4. What is a pre-signed URL in S3?

Answer:
A pre-signed URL is a temporary URL generated by the backend that gives permission to access or upload a specific S3 object for a limited time. It allows the frontend to interact with S3 without exposing AWS credentials.

IAM

Q5. What is IAM and why is it important?

Answer:
IAM stands for Identity and Access Management. It controls who or what can access AWS resources and what actions they can perform. For example, I can give an EC2 application permission to upload files to a particular S3 bucket.

Q6. Why shouldn't you put AWS access keys directly in your Node.js code?

Answer:
Because anyone who gets access to the code could potentially use those credentials. I would use environment variables for local development and preferably an IAM role attached to EC2 for applications running on AWS.

Elastic Beanstalk

Q7. What is AWS Elastic Beanstalk?

Answer:
Elastic Beanstalk is a managed service that makes deploying applications easier. Instead of manually configuring EC2, I provide my application and Beanstalk manages things like the underlying EC2 instances, deployment, scaling, and health monitoring.

Q8. If Beanstalk uses EC2 underneath, why not just use EC2?

Answer:
With EC2, I have to manage the server and deployment configuration myself. Beanstalk handles much of that infrastructure management for me, so it's simpler when I want to deploy an application without managing everything manually.

CloudWatch

Q9. What is CloudWatch used for?

Answer:
CloudWatch is used for monitoring AWS resources and applications. For example, I can monitor EC2 CPU utilization, application logs, errors, and set alarms when certain metrics cross a threshold.

Q10. Your Node.js application is returning 500 errors in production. How can CloudWatch help?

Answer:
I can check the application logs in CloudWatch to find the error and stack trace. I can also check EC2 metrics such as CPU and memory-related monitoring to see whether there is a resource problem.

// weakness
Sometimes I lose track of time when I'm deeply focused on solving a technical problem. I'm working on this by setting time limits and regularly checking my progress so I can balance focus with deadlines.

// why to hire you (exp, skills, backend strength, problem solving, Attitude)

I believe you should hire me because I have hands-on experience building full-stack applications using React, Node.js, Express, and databases like MongoDB and MySQL. I’m comfortable working on both frontend and backend, but I’m particularly interested in backend development and building APIs and scalable features.

I also have experience working with real-world concepts like authentication, payment integration, real-time communication, pagination, and microservices. Along with that, I regularly practice DSA and system design, so I can approach problems logically rather than just focusing on writing code.

Most importantly, I’m someone who learns quickly and takes ownership of the work. I believe I can contribute to the team while continuing to grow with the role.

// salary expectation
Based on my experience and the responsibilities of this role, I'm expecting around 10 to 12 LPA. However, I'm open to discussing it based on the overall opportunity and role.


