
// js, mern, mysql implementation questions

js : debounce, throttle, curry, Flatten nested array, Deep clone object, group by object key, Promise.all, Event delegation example, custom filter map reduce
react : Build search with debounce, Build pagination component, 

node/express : Create paginated API , Create search API, JWT Authentication (Generate token, Middleware to verify), 
              Write middleware (Extract token → verify → attach user), Rate limiter
               GET /products?q=phonepage=1&limit=10

mongo : Query with pagination (Model.find().skip().limit()), Aggregation (Group orders by user and count total)
sql :        Get top 3 highest salary employees SELECT * FROM employees ORDER BY salary DESC LIMIT 3; or use nested query

            Group By + Having, JOIN query, Find duplicates (--SELECT name, COUNT(*) FROM table GROUP BY name HAVING COUNT(*) > 1;
            Pagination in SQL (LIMIT 10 OFFSET 20)

CSS-
1.Difference between rem,em,px
2.Semantic elements or tag
3.How does flex box helps us in responsiveness in css
4.What is aria attribute in context of aria-label in html

JS/TS-
1.What is v8, What is hoisting?, What is a closures ?, What is a Lexical Scope?, 
  What is Garbage collector?, What is event Delegation?
1.Shallow and deep copy ( structuredClone(), JSON.parse(JSON.stringify()) , _.cloneDeep() Lodash) in js
2.Difference between type and interface in Typescript. When would you choose one over the other?
3.When to use rest parameter and spread parameter, also tell the difference
4.Difference between call, apply and bind method in js
5.Promises in js
6.Storages in js
7.How will you achieve suggestion (autocomplete) of values in TypeScript
8.Object.assign() method in js
9. Create promise in js.
10.what are the Features introduced  in ES6
11.Difference between Stack and Queue. Real time example
12.What is mixins in js
13.What is object prototype.
14.Memory leak in js 
15.What is pure functions

REACT-
1.In react how we can call an api before rendering the ui
2.Higher order component in react
3.When to use redux store and context api
4.How to optimize the react application
5.When to use react memo, useMemo and useCallBack
6.Life cycle methods & Comparison of hooks with life cycle method
7.Explain interceptor in axios in react.
8.Difference between PUT and PATCH request
9.Difference between useEffect and useLayoutEffect in react
10.How you will call the apis parallelly in react 
11.What is Virtual dom in react, how it works
12.How to pass data from child to parent
13.Virtualization in React
14.Throttling and debouncing in React
15.package.json and package.lock.json
16.what will happen if we have forget to put await in front of api in react js
17.What is currying in js or react
18. Difference between oauth and jwt
19.Difference between server and serverless
20.React query (TanStack Query)
21.What is Microfrontend Architecture & the advantages of Microfrontends?
22. Implement search api (react), implement default color green, onclick change color green-yellow-red

NODE JS-
 What is a Proxy?
1.Event loop in node.js 
2.What is cluster in node js
3.What is setImmediate & process.nextTick() in node (micro or macro tasks),
4.What is piping, streams & buffers in node js
5.Difference between authentication and authorization
6.fork, wassi and spawn in node
7.Difference between running js on browser and on node js
8.what is a callback and callback hell in node js. what are the alternatives of that
9.json web token, access token vs refresh token?
10.What are headers 
11.what is Same-Origin Policy (SOP) & CORS ?
12. what is Express & middleware
CRUD. Implement get api using node. send object from server to client


MONGO DB / SQL -
CRUD - Monogo and Mysql
Q.Difference between Sql and NoSQL
Q. Difference Primary key and foreign key
Q. Find the 2nd max age from table

1.What is Idempotency & transaction?
2.Joins and indexing in database
3.How you will achieve joins in MongoDb
4.What is sharding
8.When do you use transactions?

// Real time questions 
1. Tell me about yourself.
2. During CI/CD deployment, your build pipeline is failing intermittently. How would you debug and fix it?
3. What is event-driven architecture? Have you worked with any brokers like Kafka?
4. How do you mock API calls while testing React or Node.js code?
5. Explain how to create a simple REST API using Node.js and Express.
6. Explain microservices architecture. How would you split a MERN app into microservices?
7. What are React hooks? Explain useState, useEffect, useMemo, and useCallback with examples.
8. How does error handling work in Express.js?
9. Have you worked with GraphQL? What are its benefits over REST?
10. Your Node.js app runs fine locally but fails inside a Docker container. How would you debug it?
11. What is Docker? Have you used container for Node.js deployement?
12. In a large React app, how would you manage global state without making components tightly coupled?
13. What’s the difference between Context API and Redux? When would you use each?
14. What are the different ways to manage state in a React app (Local, Global, Server, URL state)?
15. What is middleware in Express.js? Can you give examples?
16. How does virtual DOM and diffing algorithm work in React?
17. Explain the Node.js event loop and its stages.
18. Your React app is facing performance issues due to unnecessary re-renders. How would you identify and fix them?
19. What are Pure Components, Higher-Order Components, Controlled and Uncontrolled Components in React?
20. How would you implement real-time updates (e.g., WebSockets)?
21. Have you deployed MERN apps on cloud platforms like AWS or Azure?








